Captioning sponsored by
PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION
WHERE OTHER SEES $AND GLOOM,
E.O. WILSON SEES SIGNS OF
LIFE.
I'M PUTTING IT IN -- I
I'M PUTTING MY HOPE PRIMARILY
IN HUMAN COMMON SENSE.
YOU KNOW, I LIKE WHAT ABBA EBAN
ONCE SAID, "WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS,
MEN TURN TO REASON."
MEANWHILE, IN THE SHADOW OF
THE CAPITOL, THE STRUGGLE TO
RECLAIM A NEIGHBORHOOD, AND SAVE
LIVES.
WE'RE JUST THE BEGINNING OF
SOMETHING THAT'S GOING TO BE
BEAUTIFUL.
ON THIS EDITION OF BILL
MOYERS "JOURNAL."
FROM OUR STUDIOS IN NEW YORK,
BILL
Moyers: WELCOME TO THE
"JOURNAL."
OUR SIX-YEAR-OLD GRANDSON IS A
CELEBRATED ANT-CATCHER IN OUR
HOUSEHOLD.
HE GAVE ME THIS LATEST SPECIMEN
FOR MY RECENT BIRTHDAY.
I LOOK AT IT AND FIND MYSELF
WONDERING THAT A CHILD'S
CURIOSITY CAN LEAD TO A LIFETIME
OF LEARNING, AND FINALLY TO AN
ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ALL LIVING
THINGS.
I'M NOT MAKING THAT UP.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED TO
E.O. WILSON.
AS A BOY IN ALABAMA, HE
DISCOVERED THE FIRE ANT AND WENT
ON TO BECOME ONE OF THE WORLD'S
PREEMINENT SCIENTISTS, RENOWNED
AS A BIOLOGIST, WITH 25 BOOKS TO
HIS CREDIT, TWO PULITZER PRIZES
AND HONORS GALORE.
THE IVORY BILLED WOODPECKER
COUNTS HIM A SOULMATE, AND
THERE'S NOT AN ANTHILL IN THE
WORLD THAT WOULDN'T RECOGNIZE
HIM PEERING DOWN INTO IT.
ALL THIS, A GREAT MARRIAGE, A
FINE DAUGHTER, A FILM ON HIS
LIFE IN THE MAKING.
LAURELS TO REST ON FROM NOW TO
KINGDOM COME, IF THERE IS ONE.
NOW IN HIS EIGHTH DECADE, HE'S
BEEN OFFERED ONE MORE WISH.
YOU'RE ABOUT TO FIND OUT WHAT IT
IS.
THIS SHOULD BE A BIG SCIENCE
PROJECT.
Moyers: AT THE RECENT TED
CONFERENCE-- AN ANNUAL GATHERING
OF BIG THINKERS IN TECHNOLOGY,
ENTERTAINMENT AND DESIGN-- E.O.
WILSON WAS ASKED TO MAKE A WISH
THAT COULD "CHANGE THE WORLD."
THE SEARCH FOR LIFE TO
UNDERSTAND IT AND FINALLY ABOVE
ALL TO PRESERVE IT.
THAT IS MY WISH AND LET US CALL
IT THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE.
Moyers: HE SHOWED THEM A
MOCK-UP OF WHAT HE HAS IN MIND;
A DIGITAL ONLINE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF
EVERY SINGLE LIVING SPECIES ON
EARTH.
SCIENTISTS AND LAYMEN EVERYWHERE
COULD REFER TO IT AND WOULD BE
ENCOURAGED TO CONTRIBUTE TO IT.
IT WOULD START OUT AS A
SCIENTIFIC COMPENDIUM OF
EVERYTHING WE KNOW ABOUT A GIVEN
SPECIES, AND BECOME A MAGNET FOR
NEW INFORMATION, IMMEDIATELY
TRANSLATED INTO MOST LANGUAGES,
OPEN AND FREE TO EVERYONE FROM
FIRST GRADERS TO BIOLOGISTS IN
THE FIELD OR IN THE LABORATORY.
IT'S ALWAYS BEEN A DREAM OF
MINE, BILL, OF CLASSIFYING ALL
THE SPECIES AND FINDING OUT WHAT
MAKES UP THE BIOSPHERE.
WE'RE MAYBE TODAY ABOUT ONE-
TENTH THROUGH THE DISCOVERY OF
SPECIES, MAYBE 90%--
Moyers: THAT'S ALL WE KNOW
TODAY?
10% OF THE EXISTING SPECIES?
YEAH.
IT'S AMAZING, ISN'T IT?
THAT WE DO NOT KNOW THE VAST
MAJORITY OF KINDS OF ANIMALS
MOSTLY AND MICROORGANISMS ON
EARTH.
WE LIVE IN AN UNEXPLORED PLANET.
Moyers: WELL, THAT SHOWS HOW
UNINFORMED I AM BECAUSE I
FIGURED YOU ALL HAD PRETTY WELL
MADE THE FINAL CENSUS OF
EVERYTHING THAT'S ALIVE ON
EARTH.
WELL, YOU MAKE MY POINT.
WE HAVE SCARCELY BEGUN.
ONCE IT'S ONLINE, IT WILL ALLOW
YOU TO GO TO YOUR COMPUTER
ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD, SINGLE
ACCESS ON COMMAND, PULL UP ANY
SPECIES OUT OF THE TENS OF
MILLIONS ON EARTH, PULL UP WAYS
TO IDENTIFY SPECIES IF YOU HAVE
A PLANT OR AN INSECT IN FRONT OF
YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT, AND FIND
OUT EVERYTHING THAT IS KNOWN
ABOUT IT UP TO THAT TIME.
Moyers: SORT OF A YOUTUBE OF
BUGS, INSECTS, AND FUNGI, RIGHT?
YES, AND EVERYTHING.
Moyers: EVERYTHING.
AND PEOPLE SAY THIS IS
AMAZING, "THAT CAN'T BE DONE."
I HAD RECENTLY--
Moyers: YEAH, IT'S AMAZING,
ED, IT CAN'T BE DONE.
( LAUGHTER )
WELL, A VERY DISTINGUISHED
SCIENTIST WROTE ME RECENTLY WHEN
I PUBLISHED AN ARTICLE ON THIS
SEVERAL YEARS AGO, THAT THIS WAS
WHAT WE MUST DO.
AND HE SAYS LITERALLY "ED, WHAT
HAVE YOU BEEN SMOKING?"
( LAUGHTER )
Moyers: SO I CAN SEE WHAT
THIS WILL DO FOR THE PROTEGES OF
ED WILSON.
WHAT WILL IT DO FOR MY FIVE
GRANDCHILDREN?
A LOT.
CONSIDER HOW IGNORANT WE ARE AND
WHAT DIFFERENCE IT MAKES.
WE DON'T KNOW THE GREAT MAJORITY
OF THE KINDS OF CREATURES LIVING
IN MOST PONDS OR PATCHES OF
WOODS THAT YOU WOULD PICK EVEN
AROUND HERE.
THIS MEANS THAT WHEN WE'RE
PLANNING THE ENVIRONMENT, WE'RE
TRYING TO STABILIZE THE
ENVIRONMENT, WE'RE TRYING TO GET
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, WE'RE
TRYING TO STOP THE ECOSYSTEM
FROM COLLAPSING IN THE FACE OF
GLOBAL WARMING OR WHATEVER.
WE REALLY NEED TO KNOW WHAT'S IN
EACH ONE OF THOSE HABITATS.
IT'S LIKE UNDERTAKING A MEDICAL
EXAMINATION BY YOUR DOCTOR MAYBE
NOT FEELING TOO WELL, YOU KNOW?
SOMETHING'S HAPPENING, BUT YOUR
DOCTOR EXAMINES YOU AND HE ONLY
KNOWS 10% OF WHAT'S INSIDE YOU
IN ALL OF THE ORGANS.
WE NEED THEN TO MOVE ECOLOGY WAY
AHEAD OF WHERE IT IS TODAY,
REALLY CHANGE THINGS.
Moyers: NO ONE IN OUR TIME
HAS ADDED MORE TO OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF EARTH'S ECOLOGY
THAN ED WILSON.
ONE OF THE WORLDS BEST KNOW
SCIENTISTS, WILSON'S EXPLORATION
OF NATURE STARTED IN MOBILE,
ALABAMA.
AS A 13-YEAR-OLD BOY, HE
DISCOVERED THE VERY FIRST FIRE
ANT COLONY IN THE UNITED STATES.
WELL, I WAS AT THE PLACE
WHERE THEY WERE FIRST
INTRODUCED.
I DISCOVERED THE FIRST COLONY OF
FIRE ANTS IN THE LITTLE
POPULATION WHEN IT WAS JUST
BEGINNING TO SPREAD.
Moyers: NEAR MOBILE?
YEAH, IN MOBILE.
WE LIVED FIVE BLOCKS FROM THE
DOCK AREA.
SO I CAUGHT ONE OF THE FIRST
COLONIES WHEN IT WAS
MULTIPLYING.
IT BELONGS TO A GROUP OF SPECIES
OF ANTS THAT ARE POTENTIALLY
SERIOUS PESTS.
Moyers: I THINK WE BOTH WOULD
PROBABLY STILL BE LIVING IN THE
SOUTH IF IT WEREN'T FOR THOSE
INFERNAL FIRE ANTS, RIGHT?
THAT'S RIGHT.
THEY COME FROM URUGUAY, AND THEY
JUST KEEP SPREADING.
AND DOWN SOUTH, YOU KNOW, WE
REFER TO THEM AS "FAR AIN'T,"
AND THAT'S NOT DIALECT.
IT MEANS THEY COME FROM FAR AWAY
AND THEY AIN'T GOING HOME.
( LAUGHTER )
WELL, THERE ARE THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF THESE SPECIES, AND
SOME OF THEM REALLY AREN'T THAT
FUNNY.
Moyers: HE IS THE PREEMINENT
EXPERT IN ANT BEHAVIOR AND
COMMUNICATION.
HIS RESEARCH ON THESE HIGHLY
SOCIAL CREATURES HAS TAKEN HIM
ACROSS THE GLOBE, FROM THE
PACIFIC ISLANDS TO THE
CARIBBEAN, AND HAS LEAD TO
DISCOVERIES OF HUNDREDS OF NEW
SPECIES.
HIS CONTINUOUS WORK ON ANTS AND
OTHER INSECTS HELPED FORM NEW
SCIENTIFIC VIEWS ABOUT HOW
ANIMALS AND HUMANS EVOLVE.
NOT ALL ANT USE VIOLENCE TO
DOMINATE THEIR WORLD.
SOME USE MORE SUBTLE METHODS.
Moyers: WHERE DID YOU GET
THIS PASSION FOR ANTS?
WHEN I WAS A KID.
AS A LITTLE BOY THROUGH MY
TEENAGE YEARS, I BECAME
INCREASINGLY FASCINATED BY THE
DIVERSITY OF LIFE.
ONE DAY WHEN I WAS ONLY SEVEN
YEARS AND FISHING, I PULLED A
PIN FISH-- THEY'RE CALLED WITH
SHARP DORSAL SPINES-- UP TOO
HARD AND FAST AND I BLINDED
MYSELF IN ONE EYE.
I LATER DISCOVERED I WAS ALSO
HARD OF HEARING, POSSIBLY
CONGENITAL, IN THE UPPER
REGISTER.
SO WHEN PLANNING TO BE A
PROFESSIONAL NATURALIST, I NEVER
CONSIDERED ANYTHING ELSE IN MY
ENTIRE LIFE.
I FOUND I WAS LOUSY AT BIRD
WATCHING AND COULDN'T TRACK FROG
CALLS EITHER, SO I TURNED TO THE
TEAMING SMALL CREATURES THAT CAN
BE HELD BETWEEN THE THUMB AND
FOREFINGER.
THE LITTLE THINGS THAT COMPOSE
THE FOUNDATION OF OUR
ECOSYSTEMS.
THE LITTLE THINGS THAT I LIKE TO
SAY RUN THE WORLD.
YOU KNOW, EVERY KID HAS A BUG
PERIOD AND I NEVER GREW OUT OF
MINE.
I JUST STARTED, AS MOST KIDS DO,
YOU KNOW, CATCHING BUGS AND
FROGS IN BOTTLES AND SO ON.
Moyers: WHEN THE WILSON
FAMILY MOVED NORTH, HE CARRIED
HIS CURIOSITY ABOUT NATURE WITH
HIM.
HIS FAMILY SETTLED IN A PLACE
PERFECT FOR A BUDDING
NATURALIST.
I WAS IN WASHINGTON, D.C. AND
PROVIDENTIALLY WE LIVED WITHIN
WALKING DISTANCE OF ROCK CREEK
PARK AND THE WASHINGTON ZOO.
SO A CHILD INTERESTED IN INSECTS
COMBINED WITH THE FEDERAL
MAGNIFICENCE DISPLAYING, YOU
KNOW, THE WONDERS OF NATURE,
AND READING THE "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC."
MUSTN'T MISS THE "NATIONAL
THE "NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC" WAS AN
INSPIRATION TO ME.
YOU KNOW, ALL THOSE GREAT
PICTURES OF WHAT THEY CALLED
BEETLES, JEWELS OF THE JUNGLE.
AND, YOU KNOW, BUTTERFLIES,
MAGNIFICENT INSECTS OF THE WORLD
AND SO ON.
YOU KNOW, I PORED OVER THAT.
AND THAT'S... I SAID, "HOW CAN I
BE OTHERWISE?"
OTHER THAN AN NATURALIST.
THAT'S WHAT I WANT TO DO ALL MY
LIFE.
Moyers: I WOULD HAVE THOUGHTÑi
THAT GROWING UP IN MOBILE YOU
MIGHT HAVE BECOME A DEVOTEE
OF... WHAT WAS IT?
THE LORD GOD BIRD?
YES, IF I HAD ONLY KNOWN.
THE LORD GOD BIRD.
INTERESTING NAME FOR THAT.
THAT'S THE IVORY-BILLED
WOODPECKER
Moyers: NO, THAT'S RIGHT.
AND PEOPLE WOULD SAY, "LORD GOD,
WHAT KIND OF BIRD IS THAT?"
THAT'S HOW IT GOT THE NAME.
( LAUGHTER )
Moyers: IT WASN'T THAT
COMMON.
NO, I KNOW.
YOU KNOW, THESE...
Moyers: WE HAD SOME OVER IN
LOUISIANA, NEAR EAST TEXAS, YOU
KNOW?
YEAH, AT THE SINGER TRACK.
Moyers: RIGHT.
THAT'S WHERE THE LAST ONE WAS
SEEN IN 1944.
Moyers: THE LAST ONE?
YEAH, A LITTLE BOY USED TO GO
OUT TO SEE THE LAST KNOWN ONE AT
A CERTAIN SPOT IN SINGER.
IT WAS A VERY SAD STORY.
THE SINGER RESERVE HAD BEEN CUT
OVER AND THE IVORY BILLS JUST
WENT DOWN.
AND THEN THERE WAS FINALLY JUST
ONE LEFT.
A LITTLE BOY WOULD GO AND WATCH
IT UNTIL ONE DAY A STORM CAME
OVER THERE, AND THEN HE COULDN'T
SEE IT ANYMORE.
AND THAT WAS THE LAST IT WAS
SEEN UNTIL FAIRLY RECENTLY.
Moyers: YEAH, ONE WAS SPOTTED
IN EASTERN ARKANSAS.
UH-HUH, YEAH.
Moyers: '05.
2005.
YEAH.
Moyers: WHY... BUT WHY SHOULD
WE CARE IF THE WOODPECKER GOES?
I MEAN, WE'VE LOST... HOW MANY
SPECIES HAVE WE LOST?
WE DON'T KNOW HOW MANY SPECIES
WE'VE LOST IN THE MILLENNIUM.
NO.
BUT HOW MANY SPECIES GOING
EXTINCT OR BECOMING VERY RARE DO
YOU THINK IT TAKES BEFORE YOU
SEE SOMETHING HAPPENING?
WE NOW KNOW FROM EXPERIMENTS AND
THEORY THAT THE MORE SPECIES YOU
TAKE OUT OF AN ECO... YOU KNOW,
AN ECOSYSTEM LIKE A POND, PATCH
OF FOREST, A LITTLE BIT OF
MARINE SHALLOW ENVIRONMENTS, THE
MORE YOU TAKE OUT THE LESS
STABLE IT BECOMES.
IT NOW IS LESS LIKELY YOU HAVE A
TSUNAMI OR YOU HAVE A SEVERE
DROUGHT OR YOU HAVE A FIRE, THE
LESS LIKELY THAT THAT ECOSYSTEM,
THAT BODY OF SPECIES IN THAT
PARTICULAR ENVIRONMENT IS GOING
TO COME BACK ALL THE WAY.
SO IT BECOMES LESS STABLE WITH
FEWER SPECIES.
AND THEN WE ALSO KNOW IT BECOMES
LESS PRODUCTIVE.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S NOT ABLE TO
PRODUCE AS MANY KILOGRAMS OF NEW
MATTER FROM PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND
PASSAGE THROUGH THE ECOSYSTEM.
IT'S LESS PRODUCTIVE.
IT SURE IS LESS INTERESTING,
THOUGH, ISN'T IT?
AND MORE THAN THAT WE LOSE THE
SERVICES OF THESE SPECIES.
Moyers: THE SERVICES OF THESE
SPECIES?
YES SERVICES OF THESE SPECIES
TO US.
LIKE POLLINATION AND WATER
PURIFICATION.
Moyers: THAT WE GET FREE FROM
NATURE.
YEAH.
HERE'S AN EASY WAY TO REMEMBER
IT.
WE GET FROM NATURE SCOT-FREE--
SO LONG AS WE DON'T SCREW IT UP
AND DESTROY IT-- APPROXIMATELY
THE SAME AMOUNT OF SERVICES AS
FAR AS YOU CAN MEASURE THEM IN
DOLLARS AS WE OURSELVES PRODUCE
EACH YEAR.
IT WAS ABOUT $30 TRILLION A
YEAR.
"T," TRILLION.
AND THESE CREATURES THEY HAVE
BUILT IN THEM, IN THEIR GENES
AND THEN IN THEIR PHYSIOLOGY AN
ENDLESS ARRAY OF DEFENSES, MANY
OF WHICH WE COULD USE AND WE
HAVE USED, LIKE PRODUCING
ANTIBIOTICS WE NEVER HEARD OF
USING CHEMICALS THAT WE NEVER
DREAMED EXISTED.
AND SO WE HAVE ALREADY BENEFITED
IMMENSELY FROM WILD SPECIES IN
THAT WAY.
BUT YOU KNOW, LET ME GET TO THE
BOTTOM LINE AS FAR AS I'M
CONCERNED.
AND THAT IS ISN'T IT MORALLY
WRONG TO DESTROY THE REST OF
LIFE, YOU KNOW, IN ANY WAY YOU
LOOK AT IT FOR WHAT IT'S GOING
TO DO TO HUMAN SPIRIT AND
AESTHETICS?
Moyers: ARE WE DESTROYING IT?
WELL, YES, WE ARE.
IF WE DO NOT ABATE THE VARIOUS
CHANGES WE'RE CAUSING CLIMATE,
HABITAT DESTRUCTION, THE
WE WILL, BY THE END OF THE
CENTURY, LOSE OR HAVE RIGHT AT
THE BRINK OF EXTINCTION ABOUT
HALF THE SPECIES OF PLANTS AND
ANIMALS IN THE WORLD, CERTAINLY
ON THE LAND.
Moyers: HALF THAT WE HAVE
NOW?
YEAH, HALF.
Moyers: WILL BE GONE BY THE
END OF THE 21st CENTURY?
IF WE DON'T DO SOMETHING,
YEAH.
Moyers: MANY BIOLOGISTS
BELIEVE WE'RE ON THE VERGE OF A
MASSIVE WAVE OF EXTINCTIONS
ACROSS THE NATURAL WORLD.
EVERYTHING FROM CORAL,
BUTTERFLIES, TIGERS, AND APES
ARE THREATENED.
THE U.N. RECENTLY REPORTED THAT
IN JUST 30 YEARS, ONE QUARTER OF
ALL MAMMALS WILL BE EXTINCT.
AS WE CONTINUE TO CHIP AWAY AT
NATURAL HABITATS, ALTER THE
CLIMATE AND CONSUME THE EARTH'S
RESOURCES AT AN UNSUSTAINABLE
PACE, SCIENTISTS SAY WE'RE
TRIGGERING AN EXTINCTION CRISIS
UNLIKE ANY THE EARTH HAS SEEN
FOR MILLIONS OF YEARS.
ED WILSON'S 2002 BOOK "THE
FUTURE OF LIFE" WAS A WAKE-UP
CALL.
NOW HE'S WRITTEN THIS ONE, "THE
CREATION," ADDRESSED TO
RELIGIOUS FOLKS IN PARTICULAR
STATING THAT IF THIS RISE IN
EXTINCTION CONTINUES, THE COST
TO HUMANITY WILL BE
CATASTROPHIC.
SO THIS IS WHAT YOU MEAN WHEN
YOU WRITE THAT WE HUMANS HAVE
BECOME A JUGGERNAUT?
YES.
Moyers: YOU USE THE METAPHOR
OF A GIANT METEORITE.
WE HUMAN BEINGS ARE A GIANT
METEORITE.
YEAH.
Moyers: THE BIGGEST AND MOST
DAMAGING THE EARTH HAS EVER
KNOWN.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN THAT WE ARE A
HUGE METEORITE?
WELL, 65 MILLION YEARS AGO,
THIS NOW IS PRETTY WELL
ESTABLISHED, EARTH WAS STRUCK BY
AN UNUSUALLY LARGE METEORITE OFF
THE COAST OF WHAT IS NOW
YUCATAN.
AND EVEN THOUGH THAT MAY HAVE
ONLY BEEN ABOUT TEN KILOMETERS
ACROSS, ITS POWER WHEN IT STRUCK
THE WORLD CAUSED GIGANTIC
TSUNAMIS OVER A LARGE PART OF
THE WORLD.
IT RANG THE EARTH'S SURFACE LIKE
A BELL.
VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS OCCURRED.
CLOUDS FORMED OVER THE EARTH
THAT DROPPED... KNOCKED OUT SUN
AND GREATLY REDUCED
PHOTOSYNTHESIS.
A MAJORITY OF SPECIES OF PLANTS
AND ANIMALS DIED.
AND AMONG THE GROUPS THAT DIEDñr
OUT FINALLY AND CONCLUSIVELY AT
THAT TIME WERE THE DINOSAURS.
SO WHAT WE ARE DOING IF WE DON'T
TAKE CARE OF THE LIVING
ENVIRONMENT, THEN WE'RE GOING TO
GO START, BY THE END OF THIS
CENTURY, GETTING PRETTY CLOSE TO
THE IMPACT OF THAT BIG METEORITE
65 MILLION YEARS AGO.
Moyers: AND HOW WOULD THAT
CHANGE LIFE ON EARTH?
WELL, WE JUST LIVE IN AN
IMPOVERISHED ENVIRONMENT.
IT'D BE A LOT TOUGHER.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE AS MANY
POLLINATORS.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE AS MANY FUTURE
CROPS AND GENES TO FEED
OURSELVES.
WE WOULDN'T HAVE THE SAME KIND
OF SECURITY GIVEN TO US FREE IN
TERMS OF WATER MANAGEMENT.
ALL SORTS OF THINGS WOULD HAPPEN
IN THE MOST PRACTICAL WAY.
BUT IT... I MEAN, IT SHOULD BE A
HORROR TO PEOPLE.
Moyers: I'M SITTING HERE
TRYING TO BELIEVE IS THIS
DISTINGUISHED MAN, WINNER OF TWO
PULITZER PRIZES, AUTHOR OF 25
BOOKS, TELLING ME THAT HE
CONCEIVES OF THE OBLITERATION OF
NATURE?
YES.
Moyers: THE OBLITERATION OF
NATURE?
YES.
AND DID YOU KNOW THAT THERE ARE
PEOPLE ACTUALLY SAY THAT'LL BE A
GOOD THING?
Moyers: WHY?
BECAUSE THEY THINK THAT IT'S
THE FATE OF HUMANITY TO GO ON
HUMANIZING THE PLANET AND TURN
THIS PLANET LITERALLY INTO
SPACESHIP EARTH.
IN OTHER WORDS--
Moyers: LIVE IN A SYNTHETIC
ECOSYSTEM.
YES THAT'S RIGHT OR PEOPLE
WHO SAY, "WELL, LET'S KEEP ON
GOING THE WAY WE'RE GOING.
LET'S USE UP THE EARTH.
AND BY THAT TIME, OUR SMART
SCIENTISTS"-- TRUST ME, I'M A
SCIENTIST, AND I'M... NONE OF US
COULD BE VERY THAT SMART.
BUT THEY FIGURE THAT THEY...
THAT BY THAT TIME MAYBE WE CAN
MAKE IT TO THE NEXT PLANET,
TERRAFORM IT, YOU KNOW?
TURN IT INTO AN EARTH-LIKE PLACE
AND SO FORTH.
DREAM ON.
THIS IS CRAZY.
THIS IS THE ONLY PLANET WE'RE
EVER GOING TO HAVE.
THIS PLANET HAS TAKEN TENS,
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF YEARS TO
CREATE THIS BEAUTIFUL NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT WE HAVE THAT'S TAKEN
CARE OF US SO WELL THAT IS, IN
FACT, OUR GREATEST NATURAL
HERITAGE, AND WE'RE THROWING IT
AWAY IN A MATTER OF A FEW
DECADES.
Moyers: BUT WHAT IS THE
SERIOUS RESPONSE TO THE ARGUMENT
THAT, LOOK, WE HUMAN BEINGS HAVE
ALWAYS ADAPTED TO SEVERE... TO
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE.
I MEAN, SOME COME, SOME GO.
THE MAYANS ARE GONE, THE
SUMERIANS ARE GONE, THE AZTECS
ARE GONE, BUT HUMAN BEINGS ARE
STILL HERE.
WE HAVE CONSTANTLY ADAPTED.
WE WILL ADAPT TO THE
CIRCUMSTANCES WILSON IS
DESCRIBING.
YES, BUT CONSIDER THIS.
IN TERMS OF EVOLUTION, YOU KNOW,
THE COMMON RESPONSE IS, "WELL,
EVOLUTION ALWAYS PROVIDED NEW
SPECIES."
WELL, THE PROBLEM WITH THAT IS
THE BIRTH RATE OF SPECIES IS
GOING DOWN.
WHY IS IT GOING DOWN?
BECAUSE WE'RE DESTROYING THE
CRADLES IN WHICH NEW SPECIES ARE
BORN, THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
SO WHAT DIFFERENCE DOES IT MAKE?
WELL, IF HUMANITY AS A WHOLE
DECIDED THAT IT WANTS TO LIVE IN
A WORLD WHERE EVERYTHING IS
ARTIFACTUAL AND THE PRODUCT OF
OUR BRAINS WE GIVE AWAY THIS
GREAT HERITAGE AND ALL OF THIS
MYSTERY AND BEAUTY AND
COMPLEXITY THAT WE HAVEN'T EVEN
BEGUN TO EXPLORE, WELL, I GUESS
IF THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE WANT,
THAT'S WHAT THEY'RE GOING TO
GET.
BUT I HAVE MORE FAITH IN HUMAN
BEINGS' INTELLIGENCE AND TASTE
THAN THAT.
Moyers: BUT WASN'T
CIVILIZATION PURCHASED BY THE
SUBVERSION OF NATURE?
IT WAS.
AND THAT'S WHY WE DESTROYED SO
MUCH ALREADY.
WHEN THE... THE AGRICULTURE
REVOLUTION BEGAN, AS YOU KNOW,
ABOUT 10,000 YEARS AGO, WE WENT
FROM A HUNTER/GATHERER EXISTENCE
WHERE WE WERE MORE OR LESS IN
BALANCE-- WE WEREN'T WIPING OUT
SPECIES AT ANY GREAT RATE-- TO
ONE IN WHICH WE BEGAN TO TURN
THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS,
PARTICULARLY FORESTS AND THE
GRASSLANDS, INTO AGRICULTURAL
FIELDS.
THAT PROCEEDED TO AN EXTENT THAT
IT DID, DID FORM THE ECONOMIC
BASIS FOR GREAT HUMAN POPULATION
GROWTH AND FOR THE EVOLUTION OF
CIVILIZATION.
AND WHO CAN SAY THAT THAT'S NOT
A GOOD?
IT'S JUST THAT HAVING... THAT IT
TOOK A MILLION YEARS FOR
HUMANITY, YOU KNOW, COMING
THROUGH THESE EARLY STAGES
STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE IN NATURE
TO FINALLY LEARN HOW TO BREAK
NATURE.
AND WE DID THAT 10,000 YEARS
AGO, AND WE'RE CONTINUING TO
BREAK IT.
AND NOW WE REALIZE THAT WE'VE
GOT TO PUT ON THE BRAKES AND
BRING THIS TO A HALT.
OTHERWISE WE'RE GOING TO BE
DOWN.
IT'S DOWN NOW... MANY OF THE
NATURAL ECOSYSTEMS IN THE WORLD,
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL ONES TOOK 10%
OF WHAT IT WAS, AND WE'RE NOT
STOPPING.
WE'RE GOING TO BE THROUGH THE
WHOLE BIT OF IT IN MANY PARTS OF
THE WORLD UNLESS WE DO
SOMETHING.
IT'S JUST THAT WE'RE NEAR THE
END OF NATURE IN MANY PARTS OF
THE WORLD.
Moyers: THE END OF NATURE.
THE END OF... WHAT DO YOU MEAN
BY--
I MEAN THE END OF A LARGE
PART OF THE REST OF LIFE ON THE
PLANET.
Moyers: THE LIFE THAT CAN...
COULD SURVIVE WITHOUT US.
OH, IT WOULD DO WONDERFULLY
WELL WITHOUT US.
( LAUGHTER )
Moyers: WELL, THAT'S WHAT I
WANTED TO ASK.
I MEAN, LET'S... NATURE WAS
DOING A PRETTY GOOD JOB BEFORE
WE ARRIVED AS THE LATECOMERS,
RIGHT?
WONDERFULLY WELL.
Moyers: WONDERFULLY WELL.
SO WHERE DID THIS IDEA COME FROM
THAT WE'RE THE CROWN JEWEL OF
CREATION?
WELL, YOU KNOW, I SORT OF
THINK WE ARE, IN ONE SENSE.
THAT IS TO SAY, WE ARE THE BRAIN
OF THE BIOSPHERE.
WE ARE THE ONES THAT FINALLY,
AFTER 4.5 BILLION YEARS OF
EVOLUTION-- THAT'S WHAT IT TOOK
TO GET WHERE WE ARE-- ACTUALLY
DEVELOPED ENOUGH POWER,
REASONING POWER TO SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING TO UNDERSTAND THE
HISTORY THAT CREATED US AND TO
REALIZE ALMOST TOO LATE WHAT
WE'RE DOING.
SO IN THE SENSE THAT WE ARE
SOMETHING NEW UNDER THE SUN AND
ON THE EARTH, WE HAVE AN
ENORMOUS... WE'RE THE ONES THAT
CAN DESTROY THE WORLD.
NO OTHER SINGLE SPECIES EVER HAD
ANYTHING LIKE THAT POWER.
WE HAVE THE POWER TO DESTROY THE
WORLD, THE LIVING WORLD.
AND WE ALSO HAVE THE KNOWLEDGE
TO AVOID DOING IT.
AND IT'S... IT'S SORT OF A RACE
TO THE FINISH LINE THAT WE WILL
DEVELOP THE INTELLIGENCE AND THE
POLICIES AND THE DECENCY TO
BRING IT TO A HALT, NOT JUST FOR
LIFE ITSELF, BUT FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS BEFORE, YOU KNOW,
THE JUGGERNAUT TAKES US OVER.
Moyers: WHY ARE WE ESCALATING
SO RAPIDLY NOW THE DESTRUCTIVE
IMPACT OF OUR BEHAVIOR?
WHAT'S GOING ON?
IT'S... IT'S MAINLY THAT
IT... WE'RE JUST BEING THE KIND
OF RECKLESS, IGNORANT, UNCARING
SPECIES WE'VE BEEN UP 'TIL NOW
THAT'S DOING THE DAMAGE.
WE'RE STILL INCREASING IN
NUMBERS.
WE'RE AT 6.5 BILLION.
HOWEVER, WE'RE GOING TO... WE'RE
SLOWING.
Moyers: YEAH, THE PREDICTION
IS THAT WHEN WE REACH NINE
BILLION WE'LL BEGIN TO--
YEAH, WE'LL PEAK.
SO THAT'S 40% MORE THAN WHAT WE
HAVE NOW.
I THINK WE CAN HANDLE THAT.
THAT RIGHT NOW IS A SERIOUS
PROBLEM.
IT'S NOT THE BIG PROBLEM.
THE BIG PROBLEM IS CONSUMPTION.
RISING PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION
AROUND THE WORLD.
SO THIS IS WHY THE WORLD HAS GOT
TO HAVE A GREEN REVOLUTION.
Moyers: AND BY THAT YOU MEAN?
I MEAN, LET'S KEEP ON
IMPROVING OUR QUALITY OF LIFE,
BUT LET'S FIGURE OUT-- AND WE'VE
GOT THE BRAINS TO DO IT-- OF HOW
TO INCREASE THE ECONOMY GROWING
AND THE QUALITY OF LIFE
IMPROVING WITH FEWER AND FEWER
MATERIALS AND LESS AND LESS
FOSSIL BASED OR NON-RENEWAL...
RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ENERGY.
IT'S AS SIMPLE AS THAT.
Moyers: SO YOU'RE PUTTING
YOUR HOPE IN NEW TECHNOLOGY?
I'M PUTTING MY HOPE PRIMARILY
IN HUMAN COMMON SENSE.
YOU KNOW, I LIKE WHAT ABBA EBAN
ONCE SAID DURING THE 1967 WAR.
HE SAID, "WHEN ALL ELSE FAILS,
MEN TURN TO REASON."
AND I THINK WE ARE AT THE STAGE
NOW WE ARE READY TO TURN TO
REASON.
NOW IF WE CAN ONLY PERSUADE THE
LEADERSHIP OF THE STRONGEST AND
WEALTHIEST COUNTRY IN THE WORLD
TO GAIN THIS UNDERSTANDING, THEN
THE TECHNOLOGY WILL BECOME
RELATIVELY EASY.
THAT IS TO GO GREEN AND PUT LESS
OF WHAT WE CALL THE ECOLOGICAL
FOOTPRINT ONTO THE WORLD.
WE'LL EASE UP ON THE REST OF THE
WORLD AND BECOME SUSTAINABLE AND
ALLOW THE REST OF LIFE TO
SURVIVE AND COME THROUGH.
I LIKE TO CALL IT THE
BOTTLENECK.
COME THROUGH THE BOTTLENECK
WE'RE IN NOW.
WE'LL COME OUT THE OTHER END IF
WE USE OUR HEAD WITH THE KIND OF
IMPROVED LIVES THAT WE ALL DREAM
OF AND WITH BRINGING AS MUCH OF
THE REST OF LIFE WITH US AS
POSSIBLE.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S WHY I SAY WHAT
WE'RE DOING NOW, IF WE DON'T
STOP IT, IS THE FOLLY OUR
DESCENDENTS WILL LEAST LIKELY
FORGIVE US 100 YEARS NOW, 200
YEARS.
THEY SAID, "WHAT DID THEY THINK
THEY WERE DOING?"
Moyers: HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN
THAT SO MANY SMART PEOPLE REMAIN
PASSIVE IN THE FACE OF THE
DESTRUCTION OF THE CONDITIONS
FOR SURVIVAL?
I WISH YOU WOULD TELL ME.
Moyers: I ASK THE QUESTIONS,
ED.
YOU'RE A SCIENTIST.
YOU FIND OUT THE ANSWERS.
YOU TALK TO SO MANY SMART
PEOPLE, I WAS HOPING YOU WOULD
COME UP WITH A QUICK ANSWER.
IF I KNEW, I'D... I WOULD FIGURE
OUT WITH OTHERS BETTER WAYS OF
PERSUASION.
IT REALLY IS SLOW.
IT'S SLOW IN TAKING OVER.
Moyers: WHAT WOULD THE
STEWARDSHIP OF THE EARTH MEAN TO
US PERSONALLY?
IF I SAID, "I'M GOING TO TAKE MY
SHARE OF THE RESPONSIBILITY,"
WHAT WOULD THAT MEAN TO ME
PERSONALLY?
I THINK MOST PEOPLE LISTENING
WANT TO DO SOMETHING.
THEY WANT TO KNOW WHAT TO DO.
IT CAN BE FROM JUST BEING
LOCALLY ACTIVE IN SAVING A
WOODLAND ALONG A NEARBY RIVER OR
REGIONALLY IN ALLYING YOURSELF
WITH A DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT, WHICH-- OR ONE OF
THE CONSERVATION ORGANIZATIONS
WORKS LOCALLY-- TO ENSURE THAT A
CERTAIN BIOLOGICALLY RICH AREA
OR WETLAND IS SET ASIDE AS A
PARK AND A RESERVE RATHER THAN
BEING TURNED OVER TO DEVELOPERS.
BUT LET ME TELL YOU THE ONE THAT
I THINK MOST PEOPLE MIGHT BE
LISTENING TO US KNOW THE ANSWER.
WE NEED LEADERSHIP.
WE DESPERATELY NEED LEADERSHIP
THAT WORKS OFF OF WHAT WE HAVE
LEARNED THROUGH SCIENCE, THAT
HAS PRODUCED A CONSENSUS ABOUT
WHAT IS HAPPENING TO THE EARTH'S
ENVIRONMENT, INCLUDING THE
LIVING CREATION.
AND SEES THE POTENTIAL IN IT AND
NOT JUST THE NEED IN IT AND
GIVES, IN THIS COUNTRY
ESPECIALLY, THE KIND OF VISION
OF A FUTURE THAT WE CAN WORK FOR
AS A PEOPLE TOWARD, AS A PEOPLE,
THAT I THINK PEOPLE ARE HUNGRY
FOR.
Moyers: THERE IS A BIAS,
THOUGH, AT THE MOMENT AGAINST
SCIENCE THAT DISRUPTS OUR
RELIGIOUS BELIEF OR SCIENCE THAT
DIMINISHES OUR ECONOMIC GROWTH.
RIGHT.
BOTH BASED UPON MISCONCEPTIONS.
Moyers: HOW SO?
A GREENING OF AMERICA MEANS
NEW MARKETS, NEW WAYS OF
DEVELOPING RESOURCES, NEW
TECHNOLOGIES, NEW DIRECTIONS,
NEW ERAS OF EDUCATION, TRAINING,
AND ON.
SO AS FAR AS ECONOMY IS
CONCERNED, THAT'S A NO-BRAINER.
AS FAR AS RELIGION IS CONCERNED
I HAVE... I HAVE A VERY
DIFFERENT VIEW FROM WHAT MANY
SCIENTISTS AND ENVIRONMENTALISTS
HAVE OF THE RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY.
AND THAT IS, HAVING GROWN UP AS
A SOUTHERN BAPTIST--
Moyers: YOU ANSWERED THE
ALTAR CALL.
YOU WENT UNDER THE WATER.
I DID.
AND I GREW UP IN ONE OF THE
REDDEST OF THE RED STATES.
AND I HAVE THE HIGHEST RESPECT
FOR THEM, YOU KNOW, FOLKS WHO
ARE CALLED THESE DAYS EVEN
FUNDAMENTALISTS AND THE 42% OF
AMERICANS IDENTIFIED AS
EVANGELICAL.
I LIKE THEM.
I THINK THEY'RE HIGHLY
INTELLIGENT AND A LARGE
PERCENTAGE OF THEM HIGHLY
EDUCATED AND SO ON.
SO IT'S ALWAYS OCCURRED TO ME
THAT THE SCHISM BETWEEN
SCIENTISTS, AGREED MOST ARE
LIBERAL AND NON-BELIEVERS, AND
THE GREAT MAJORITY OF AMERICANS,
75%, YOU KNOW, WHO COULD BE
CALLED RELIGIOUS TO SOME EXTENT
WAS... MIGHT BE AN ARTIFACT.
Moyers: WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU
HAVE IN COMMON WITH CONSERVATIVE
CHRISTIAN?
WELL, ACTUALLY, JUST ABOUT
EVERYTHING EXCEPT CERTAIN
BELIEFS OF WHERE IT ALL CAME
FROM AND WHO'S LOOKING OVER US.
WE ARE MUCH CLOSER TOGETHER.
I COULD GO DOWN, YOU KNOW, AND
PICK A PASTOR FROM SOME SMALL
COUNTRY CHURCH ALONG THE BYWAY
OF THE HIGH... OF ALABAMA AND
I'LL BET WE'D-- AS I SUGGESTED
IN THAT BOOK-- WE SAT DOWN AND
TALKED ABOUT OUR DEEPEST BELIEFS
TOGETHER, WE'D COME UP WITH MORE
AGREEMENTS, AGREEMENTS ON MORE
THINGS THAN DISAGREEMENTS.
AND THEN ISN'T IT THE AMERICAN
WAY?
WE COULD SAY, "LET'S PUT THAT
ASIDE FOR AWHILE AND WORK
TOGETHER WHEN WE REALLY HAVE
SOMETHING WE NEED TO WORK
TOGETHER ON."
Moyers: YEAH, BUT, ED,
BUT MANY OF THE CHRISTIANS WHO
READ THE BIBLE LITERALLY REJECT
THE CONCLUSION OF YOU SCIENTISTS
THAT WE'VE EVOLVED FROM LOWER
FORMS.
I MEAN, THEY BELIEVE THE EARTH
IS NOT OUR HOME.
WE'RE HEAVEN BOUND.
SOME OF THEM BELIEVE THE SECOND
COMING OF JESUS IS SO
IMMINENT...
I KNOW.
Moyers: ...THAT CARING FOR
THE EARTH IS OF LITTLE
CONSEQUENCE.
BUT YOU...
NOW...
Moyers: ...YOU ADDRESSED THIS
BOOK, YOUR LATEST BOOK, "THE
CREATION: AN APPEAL TO SAVE LIFE
ON EARTH," TO A SOUTHERN BAPTIST
PASTOR.
YOU AND I KNOW MANY OF THEM.
YES.
Moyers: WE GREW UP WITH THEM.
Moyers: WHY DID YOU WRITE
THIS BOOK TO A SOUTHERN BAPTIST
PASTOR?
WELL, I DID PARTLY BECAUSE
THAT'S MY BACKGROUND.
ALTHOUGH, I'M NOW A SECULAR
HUMANIST.
A REAL... A THOROUGH GOING
SECULARIST.
IT'S MY BACKGROUND.
I UNDERSTOOD IT.
I RESPECTED GREATLY THE PEOPLE
OF THE CULTURE I GREW UP IN.
BUT ALSO, THERE WAS THE NEW YORK
EFFECT, WHAT I CALL THE NEW YORK
EFFECT.
IN ADDRESSING EVANGELICALS
INSTEAD OF UNITARIANS.
( LAUGHTER )
Moyers: WELL, THERE'S A LOT
MORE OF 'EM FOR ONE THING.
( LAUGHTER )
THERE ARE MORE BAPTISTS IN TEXAS
THAN THERE ARE PEOPLE, AND I
GUESS THAT'S PROBABLY TRUE OF
ALABAMA.
SO, YOU ADDRESSED THEM...
BECAUSE THEY'RE MUSCULAR.
THEY'RE POWERFUL.
WELL, ALSO  AS I SAY, THE NEW
YORK EFFECT IS THAT IF YOU CAN
MAKE IT IN NEW YORK, YOU CAN
MAKE IT ANYWHERE.
IN OTHER WORDS, IF YOU CAN MAKE
IT WITH SOUTHERN BAPTISTS, YOU
CAN MAKE IT ANYWHERE.
AND THE ARGUMENT I MAKE IN THE
CREATION IS EXTREMELY SIMPLE.
IT'S THAT IT IS... I SAID "LET
US IN THE SERVICE OF A
TRANSCENDENT MORAL OBLIGATION
AND CONCERN PUT ASIDE OUR
DIFFERENCES FOR THE TIME BEING
AND NOT FUSS WITH EACH OTHER
OVER EVOLUTION, IN OTHER WORDS
WHERE IT ALL CAME FROM.
LET US AGREE LOOKING AT THE
EVIDENCE THAT IS DISAPPEARING.
AND LET US, DARE I USE THE WORD,
GATHER AT THE RIVER."
COME TOGETHER ON COMMON GROUND
WHERE WE CAN EXERCISE THE
EXTRAORDINARY POWER WE HAVE
JOINTLY.
AND I ARGUE AND FEW PEOPLE
DISAGREED WITH ME THAT SCIENCE
AND RELIGION ARE THE TWO MOST
POWERFUL SOCIAL FORCES IN THE
WORLD.
HAVING THEM AT ODDS AT EACH
OTHER ALL THE WAY UP TO THE
HIGHEST LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT AND
THE POPULAR MEDIA ALL THE TIME
IS NOT PRODUCTIVE.
Moyers: IN YOUR BOOK, YOU ASK
BOTH SCIENCE AND RELIGION TO SET
ASIDE THEIR DIFFERENCES ABOUT
METAPHYSICAL ISSUES.
MEET ON THE NEAR SIDE OF
METAPHYSICS.
Moyers: MEET ON THE NEAR SIDE
OF METAPHYSICS.
RIGHT.
Moyers: BUT CAN YOU ASK
RELIGION TO DO THAT WHEN BY
NATURE RELIGION IS CONCERNED
WITH THE METAPHYSICAL, WITH
UNSEEN DEITIES?
SURE, YOU CAN.
YOU KNOW, I HAVE A LOT OF
PHYSICISTS FRIENDS WORKING ON
STRING THEORY WHO ARE ALSO
PREOCCUPIED WITH THINGS THEY
CAN'T SEE OR MEASURE.
BUT HOWEVER, THE POINT HERE IS
YES YOU CAN AND WE'VE DONE IT.
TO IMAGINE A WORLD WHERE
SCIENCE AND RELIGION CORPORATE
TOGETHER.
Moyers: IT WAS THAT LAST YEAR
ED WILSON PLAYED AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN ORGANIZING A COALITION
OF SCIENTISTS AND EVANGELICAL
CHRISTIANS TO MEET ON GLOBAL
WARMING AND HABITAT
PRESERVATION.
WE WILL NOT ALLOW EVANGELICAL
CHRISTIANS WITH SCIENTIST TODAY,
WE WILL NOT ALLOW IT THE,
CREATION, TO BE DEGRADED,
DESTROYED BY HUMAN FOLLY.
Moyers: YOU SAY YOU'RE A
SECULAR HUMANIST.
WHAT DO YOU WANT ME TO HEAR WHEN
YOU SAY THAT?
WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY THAT?
THAT TERM DRIVES THE
EVANGELICAL, THE CHRISTIAN RIGHT
INTO A FRENZY.
A HUMANIST IS A PERSON WHO
BELIEVES THAT IN MATTERS ETHICAL
AND IN MATTERS OF ESTHETIC AND
CENTRAL CONCERN SHOULD PUT
HUMANITY AS THE FIRST AND FINAL
PURPOSE OF IT ALL.
THAT WE HAVE JUST THIS ONE
PLANET TO LIVE.
WE ARE NOT BEING LOOKED OVER.
BUT WE ARE ON OUR OWN,
ESSENTIALLY.
AND WE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR
OURSELVES AND WE BETTER GET
TOGETHER AS A SPECIES AND WORK
IT OUT AND STOP RELYING ON
SUPERNATURAL POWERS.
THAT'S BASICALLY WHAT HUMANISM
IS.
Moyers: YOU DESCRIBE THE
WORLD AS IT IS AND YET, YOU'RE
NOT A MAN WHO'S A... YOU'RE NOT
A PESSIMIST.
YOU'RE... THERE'S A LOT OF HOPE
IN THE CREATION.
WHAT CAN WE DO TO TRY TO MAKE A
DIFFERENCE ON THE FOOTPRINT THAT
WE HUMANS ARE LEAVING ON THIS
EARTH?
I THINK PROBABLY IT GOES
DOWN... LET'S GO DOWN ONE LAYER
OF THOUGHT FROM WHAT WE HAD
EARLIER, AND GO TO THE DEEPEST
LEVEL.
IF WE COULD CHANGE OUR
WORLDVIEW, IT WOULD BE SOMEWHAT
RADICAL.
IT WOULD MEAN SEEING OURSELVES
AS A BIOLOGICAL SPECIES IN A
BIOLOGICAL WORLD.
THAT WE ARE A SPECIES
EXQUISITELY WELL ADAPTED TO THIS
PLANET AND THAT WE ORIGINATED
HERE AND THAT OUR PECULIARITIES,
INCLUDING THE ONES THAT THREATEN
US ALL THE TIME, THAT THREATEN
YOUR OWN... THREATEN OUR OWN
EXISTENCE ARE... CAN BE
UNDERSTOOD BY THE HISTORY OF THE
WAY WE ORIGINATED IN THAT LIVING
WORLD.
AND IF WE COULD JUST PLACE
OURSELVES REALISTICALLY IN THAT
CONTEXT AND STOP THINKING OF
OURSELVES AS SEMI ANGELS, YOU
KNOW, ON THE WAY... THAT THIS IS
JUST A WEIGH STATION ON A WAY ON
UP TO AN IDEALIZED EXISTENCE,
CHANGE THAT.
THEN I THINK WE WOULD GET PRETTY
SERIOUS ABOUT PEACE AND LONG
TERM SECURITY AND SAVING THE
REST OF LIFE.
AND... AND KEEPING OUR OPTIONS
OPEN FOR THE FUTURE.
Moyers: E.O. WILSON, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR JOINING ME ON
THE JOURNAL.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR HAVING
ME.
Moyers: E.O. WILSON'S WISH IS
ONE STEP CLOSER TO REALITY.
IT HAS BEEN A DREAM COME
TRUE.
Moyers: THE JOHN D. AND
CATHERINE T. MacARTHUR
FOUNDATION RECENTLY MADE A GRANT
OF $20 MILLION TOWARD CREATING
THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE.
Moyers: LISTENING TO E.O.
WILSON, MY COLLEAGUES AND I
FOUND OURSELVES TALKING ABOUT
DIAMOND TEAGUE.
DIAMOND TEAGUE CAME INTO OUR
LIVES THREE AND A HALF YEARS AGO
IN A REPORT ABOUT SOME KIDS WHO
LIVE IN THE SHADOW OF THE U.S.
CAPITOL, BUT MIGHT AS WELL BE ON
THE FAR SIDE OF THE MOON FOR ALL
OFFICIAL WASHINGTON CARES.
THEY LIVE IN AN IMPOVERISHED
NEIGHBORHOOD, RIDDLED WITH
VIOLENCE AND TOXIC WASTE.
A RIVER FLOWS THROUGH IT, DIRTY
AND DANGEROUS FROM POLLUTION.
DIAMOND TEAGUE AND HIS PALS
FOUND MEANING IN THEIR LIVES AS
THEY SET OUT TO CLEAN UP THE
RIVER AND REDEEM THEIR
COMMUNITY.
THIS REPORT ON THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS WAS PRODUCED
BY WILLIAM BRANGHAM AND REPORTED
BY NPR's DANIEL ZWERDLING.
Reporter: DARIUS PHILLIPS
WOULD BE THE FIRST TO TELL YOU
THAT HE WAS THE KIND OF MAN YOU
SHOULD BE AFRAID OF.
PEOPLE ON THE STREETS HERE IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. USED TO CALL
HIM "THE BIG HURT."
AND YOU COULD SAY SOMETHING
ABOUT, SAY SOMETHING TO ME, YOU
DIDN'T EVEN HAVE TO SAY
ANYTHING, YOU COULD LOOK AT ME A
DIFFERENT WAY, AND I'M DOWN YOUR
NECK, JUST LIKE THAT.
Reporter: PHILLIPS SOLD
CRACK, HE STOLE CARS, HE ROBBED
TAXI DRIVERS.
HE'S 22 YEARS OLD.
MY WHOLE PHILOSOPHY AT THAT
PARTICULAR TIME WAS NEVER LEAVE
THE HOUSE WITH LESS THAN $5,000
ON YOU.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S LIKE, THAT WAS
MY QUOTA FOR THE DAY.
I GOT TO PUT TEN IN THE BANK
EVERY DAY, AND I ALWAYS GOT TO
WALK AROUND WITH FIVE IN MY
POCKET, EVERY DAY.
Reporter: LASHAUNTYA MOORE IS
A 24-YEAR-OLD WELFARE MOTHER.
HER BROTHER'S IN PRISON FOR
DOUBLE HOMICIDE.
SHE STARTED HAVING BABIES WHEN
SHE WAS IN HIGH SCHOOL.
I HAD THAT FANTASY THAT THE
GUY, HE LOVED ME AND WE WERE
GOING TO GET MARRIED AND WE WERE
GOING TO HAVE A BIG HOUSE AND
TAKE CARE OF OUR BABY.
WE WERE GOING TO HAVE A GOOD
LIFE AND WE WERE GOING TO BE
HAPPY.
SO, THAT WAS MY PLAN.
AND I TOLD THAT TO MY FATHER.
AND HE WAS LIKE, "YOU'RE LIVING
IN A DREAM WORLD."
Reporter: THERE'S NOT MUCH
REASON TO EXPECT THAT THESE
YOUNG PEOPLE WOULD EVER MAKE IT
OUT OF THIS WORLD.
BUT NOW THEY'RE TRYING TO
TRANSFORM THEIR LIVES AND
THEY'RE DOING IT PARTLY BY
TRANSFORMING THE AREA WHERE THEY
LIVE.
WE'RE GOING TO FOCUS ON THIS
AREA, CLEANUP ON THE EXTERIOR OF
THE GATE.
Reporter: A FEW MONTHS AGO,
THEY JOINED A NON-PROFIT PROGRAM
CALLED THE EARTH CONSERVATION
CORPS.
THE BASIC IDEA SOUNDS SIMPLE:
YOU RECRUIT A FEW DOZEN YOUNG
MEN AND WOMEN FROM THE
COMMUNITY-- EVEN IF THEY HAVE
CRIMINAL RECORDS OR IF THEY'RE
DROP-OUTS-- AND YOU HIRE THEM TO
CLEAN UP AND RESTORE THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
BUT NOTHING IS SIMPLE IN THIS
PART OF THE NATION'S CAPITAL.
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT
THIS WASHINGTON ON THE BANKS OF
THE SHINING POTOMAC RIVER; WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THIS WASHINGTON ON
THE BANKS OF THE OTHER RIVER.
THEY CALL THE RIVER AND THE
NEIGHBORHOOD ANACOSTIA.
MOST CALL THIS WHOLE AREA
"SOUTHEAST."
IT'S ONLY A FEW BLOCKS FROM THE
U.S. CAPITOL, BUT IT'S ONE OF
THE WORST NEIGHBORHOODS IN
AMERICA.
WHEN WE CAME HERE, YOU
COULDN'T SEE THE RIVER STANDING
HERE.
THERE WERE TRASH HEAPS 100 FEET
HIGH.
Reporter: BOB NIXON USED TO
BE A HOLLYWOOD PRODUCER.
HE CAME TO WASHINGTON IN THE
EARLY 1990s, TO SHOOT A FILM
ABOUT THE ENVIRONMENT.
NIXON STAYED AND HE SET UP THE
EARTH CONSERVATION CORPS,
BECAUSE HE FELT HE HAD TO DO
SOMETHING ABOUT THIS
ENVIRONMENT.
THEY DIDN'T JUST DUMP TRASH
HERE, THEY DUMPED PEOPLE HERE.
THERE ARE, YOU KNOW, 90% OF THE
PUBLIC HOUSING COMMUNITIES IN
WASHINGTON ARE, YOU KNOW, WITHIN
A MILE AND A HALF OF THIS DUMP
RIGHT HERE.
Reporter: EVERY CITY HAS A
PLACE LIKE SOUTHEAST.
THIS IS WHERE THEY PUT THE
PROJECTS, THIS IS WHERE THEY PUT
THE FACTORIES AND THE FREEWAYS.
THIS IS WHERE EVERYBODY PUTS
THEIR POLLUTION.
BUT THE KILLINGS ALONG THESE
STREETS GIVE WASHINGTON ITS
HORRENDOUS DISTINCTION: IT HAS
THE HIGHEST MURDER RATE OF ANY
MAJOR CITY IN THE COUNTRY.
EVERY DAY, EVERY DAY, YOU
KNOW, "SUCH AND SUCH DIED."
YOU KNOW, "SUCH AND SUCH DIED."
TWO FRIENDS OF MINE WERE
KILLED.
AND MY UNCLE WAS SHOT UP AT THE
SAME TIME.
HE WAS SHOT IN THE STOMACH WITH
AN A.K.
MY SENIOR YEAR OF HIGH SCHOOL
I HAD TO GO TO 11 FUNERALS.
MY SENIOR YEAR OF HIGH SCHOOL.
Reporter: THESE YOUNG PEOPLE
SAY WHEN THEY FIRST HEARD ABOUT
THE EARTH CONSERVATION CORPS,
THE LAST THING THE CARED ABOUT
WAS CLEANING UP THE ENVIRONMENT.
THEY WERE LOOKING FOR A WAY TO
SURVIVE.
THE CORPS PAYS ROUGHLY MINIMUM
WAGE, PLUS THEY GET HEALTH
INSURANCE AND A $5,000
SCHOLARSHIP IF THEY GO BACK TO
SCHOOL.
BUT SOMETHING CLICKS WHEN THEY
GET OUT ON THE ANACOSTIA.
THEY GO ABOUT A MILE UPSTREAM,
AND THEY SEE THEIR COMMUNITY IN
A NEW WAY.
BASICALLY LIKE FIVE, TEN
MINUTES AWAY, I LIVE FROM HERE.
AND THIS IS... THIS IS NOT ALL I
KNOW, BUT THIS IS WHERE, THIS ISçó
A PART OF ME.
THIS IS MY HERITAGE.
AND TO BE A PART OF SOMETHING SO
BEAUTIFUL, IT'S OVERWHELMING
WHEN YOU LOOK AT IT AROUND HERE,
AND YOU CAN SAY THAT I'M A PART
OF SOMETHING SO BEAUTIFUL.
Reporter: PHILLIPS AND THE
OTHER CORPS MEMBERS TAKE VIDEOS
WHEREVER THEY GO SO THEY CAN
DOCUMENT THEIR HERITAGE AND SHOW
HOW THEY'RE TRYING TO SAVE IT.
I'M AT THE MOUTH OF BEAVER
DAM RIGHT NOW, READY TO TAKE
THREE MORE WATER SAMPLES.
Reporter: THE PROBLEM IS,
THIS RIVER HAS BECOME ONE OF
MOST POLLUTED IN AMERICA.
YOU CAN'T TELL BY LOOKING AT IT,
BUT HEALTH OFFICIALS ESTIMATE
THAT MORE THAN A BILLION GALLONS
OF RAW SEWAGE END UP IN THE
ANACOSTIA, EVERY YEAR.
TODAY, THE CORPS IS GOING OUT ON
ONE OF ITS REGULAR PATROLS.
THEY'VE HEARD THAT RAW SEWAGE
MIGHT BE POURING INTO A
TRIBUTARY ILLEGALLY, AND THEY'RE
INVESTIGATING.
WHEN THEY FIND SUSPECT DUMPING,
THEY REPORT IT.
MY NAME IS JEROME GLOVER OF
THE EARTH CONSERVATION CORPS.
THIS IS THE FIRST DAY OF OUR
TESTING OF THE WATER QUALITY.
WHAT DO YOU THINK THIS IS?
I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT IT IS.
IT HASN'T RAINED IN LIKE, FOUR
OR FIVE DAYS.
IN 24 HOURS, WE'LL KNOW.
Reporter: AND THE NEXT
MORNING, THE RESULTS CONFIRM
WHAT THEY SUSPECTED.
THESE BIG GLOPS RIGHT HERE,
IT SHOWS THAT THE ANACOSTIA IS
CONTAMINATED WITH FECAL
COLIFORMS.
Reporter: FECAL WHAT?
COLIFORM.
IT'S... IT'S LIKE HUMAN CRAP,
FOR REAL.
SO, YEAH, AND THERE IT IS RIGHT
THERE.
Reporter: BOB NIXON SAYS
THESE CORPS MEMBERS ARE DOING
SOME OF THE WORK THEIR
GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE DOING.
THIS IS, IN A LOT OF SENSE,
GROUND ZERO FOR A LOT OF ISSUES
THAT ARE FACING OUR WHOLE
COUNTRY.
THEY'RE FIGHTING
ENVIRONMENTAL... PEOPLE CALL IT
"ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE," I THINK
IT'S "ENVIRONMENTAL INJUSTICE."
ALL SORTS OF SORT OF INJUSTICES
PILED ONE ON TOP OF THE OTHER
THAT THEY'RE TRYING TO UNTANGLE.
Reporter: WHEN YOU TALK TO
CORPS MEMBERS, THEY ALL GIVE
DIFFERENT REASONS WHY THEY'RE
CAUGHT UP IN THIS WORK.
I LOVE THE RESEARCH, BECAUSE
IT'S FUN.
IT'S LIKE BEING A DETECTIVE.
YOU GET TO FIND OUT WHO'S
ACTUALLY DOING WHAT, AND WE CAN
WRITE LETTERS AND GET THINGS TO
HAPPEN.
Reporter: ANOTHER CORPS
MEMBER, JEROME SCOTT, SAYS HE
WANTS TO PROTECT WILDLIFE ALONG
THIS RIVER.
I WANT TO BE A ZOOLOGIST, A
MARINE BIOLOGIST, ANYTHING THAT
HAS TO DO WITH ANIMALS.
I LOVE IT.
Reporter: ACTUALLY, HE'S
ALREADY TEACHING A BIT OF
SCIENCE.
JUST ABOUT EVERY MORNING,
MEMBERS OF THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS AND ANOTHER
NONPROFIT GROUP TAKE STUDENTS
FROM LOCAL SCHOOLS OUT ON THE
RIVER.
THEY'RE TEACHING THE NEXT
GENERATION ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENT.
DAVID SMITH HELPS RUN THE CORPS.
HE'S PICKED JEROME SCOTT TO BE
ONE OF THE GUIDES.
RIGHT NOW, HE HAS AN
EXTENSIVE KNOWLEDGE ON TREES,
GREATER THAN MINE.
AN EXTENSIVE KNOWLEDGE ON
INVASIVE AND EXOTIC SPECIES OF
PLANTS, TREES, AND ANIMALS.
HE'S DONE.
MAN, I COULD GO ON FOR ABOUT 15
MORE MINUTES ABOUT JUST SOME OF
THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS THAT HE MADE
LAST YEAR.
Reporter: SMITH SAYS, PICTUREÑi
JEROME SCOTT THROUGH THE EYES OF
THESE KIDS FROM THE INNER CITY.
YOU NEVER SEE A BLACK GUY ON
A BOAT TEACHING ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCES.
SO BY SEEING A BLACK GUY FROM
D.C., ON A BOAT, TEACHING YOU
ABOUT POLLUTION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL, AQUATIC
VEGETATION, THAT SORT OF THING,
IT MAKES IT MORE OF A REALITY
THAT YOU CAN ACHIEVE IT
YOURSELF.
THE KIDS THINK THAT THE
RIVER'S SO DIRTY, YOU KNOW, THAT
THERE COULD BE NO WAY FISH COULD
BE LIVING IN IT.
BUT WE SHOW THERE IS FISH LIVING
IN IT.
THEY ARE SOME STRONG FISH, YOU
KNOW?
AND I LOVE THE WAY THEY... THEIR
INTENSITY, THEIR FIGHT, YOU
KNOW, TO STAY IN THIS RIVER.
Reporter: SO YOU LOVE THE
FACT THAT THEY'RE SURVIVORS?
THEY'RE SURVIVORS.
THEY'RE, THEY'RE SURVIVING FISH.
EXACTLY.
Reporter: THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS HAS SURVIVED
FOR MORE THAN TEN YEARS NOW.
AND THAT'S A BIG ACCOMPLISHMENT,
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU CONSIDER THE
OBSTACLES.
MORE THAN HALF THE KIDS WHO SIGN
UP END UP DROPPING OUT BEFORE
THEY FINISH THEIR ONE-YEAR TERM.
IN THE PAST, SOME LEFT FOR
BETTER PAYING JOBS, BUT OTHER
CORPS MEMBERS WERE ON DRUGS,
SOME GOT KICKED OUT BECAUSE THEY
STARTED FIGHTS.
CORPS MEMBERS SAY IF THEY'RE
REALLY GOING TO SUCCEED, THEY
HAVE TO REMAKE THEMSELVES.
THEY HAVE TO UNLEARN THE
BEHAVIOR THAT HELPED THEM GET BY
ON THE STREETS.
WE GOT EVERYBODY HERE?
Reporter: CORPS MEMBERS NOW
MEET ONCE A WEEK AT THEIR
HEADQUARTERS TO LEARN HOW TO
DEAL WITH THEIR ANGER.
REMEMBER IN FEEDBACK, THERE
ARE NO NEGATIVES.
WE ACCOMPLISHED THIS AND WE CAN
IMPROVE THIS.
ME?
I'M VERY SHORT TEMPERED.
I USED TO BE VERY, VERY SHORT
TEMPERED, AND I WILL GO OFF JUST
LIKE THAT.
Reporter: PHILLIPS SAYS HE
ALMOST GOT INTO A FIGHT WITH A
FELLOW CORPS MEMBERS JUST A FEW
WEEKS AGO.
SHE GOT FURIOUS WHEN HE WOULDN'T
HELP HER WITH SOMETHING, AND SHE
SAID SHE WAS GOING TO KILL HIM.
AND I SAID, "IS THAT A
THREAT?"
AND USUALLY IF SOMEONE SAY,
"YES," THEN I'M DOWN YOUR THROAT
IN A PHYSICAL WAY AND I'M GOING
TO TRY AND KILL YOU.
YOU SAY YOU'RE GOING TO KILL ME?
LET ME GET AT YOU FIRST BEFORE
YOU GET TO WHEREVER YOU GOT TO
GO.
Reporter: WHAT'D YOU DO
DIFFERENTLY THIS TIME?
THIS TIME, I JUST... I
RELAXED.
THEY TELL YOU YOU HAVE A SHORT
WINDOW WHERE IT'S YOUR "THINKING
PROCESS TIME," AND YOU USE THAT
TIME RIGHT THERE TO THINK ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU DO DO
SOMETHING.
THAT CONSEQUENCES IS GOING TO
FOLLOW BEHIND THAT.
BUT THIS TIME, I USE ALL OF MY
SKILLS THAT DAY, AND EVERYBODY
WAS PROUD OF ME.
MY... MY SUPERVISOR, YOU KNOW,
DAVID, EVERYBODY WAS LIKE, "MAN,
I DON'T BELIEVE YOU.
YOU DID IT.
YOU ACTUALLY DID IT."
Reporter: STILL, NO MATTER
HOW MUCH THE CORPS MEMBERS
CHANGE THEMSELVES, THEY CAN'T
CONTROL THE OUTSIDE WORLD.
VIOLENCE HAS BECOME SO COMMON
HERE IN SOUTHEAST WASHINGTON
THAT IT THREATENS EVERYTHING THE
CORPS STANDS FOR.
IMAGINE THIS WORLD WITHOUT
TREES.
IT WOULDN'T BE ONE.
Reporter: A FEW MONTHS AGO,
ONE OF THE CORPS MEMBERS WAS
MURDERED.
THEY'RE ABOUT TO DO THIS
PIECE CALLED "A TREE GROWS" AND
I HOPE YOU ENJOY IT.
Reporter: THIS IS DIAMOND
TEAGUE.
HE WAS ONE OF THE MOST
CHARISMATIC YOUNG MEN WHO HAS
EVER JOINED THE CORPS.
THEY SAY TEAGUE WORKED SO HARD
FOR THE COMMUNITY THAT THEY
JOKINGLY CALLED HIM "CHOIR BOY."
HE WAS SHOT IN THE HEAD IN FRONT
OF HIS HOUSE.
HE WAS 19 YEARS OLD.
THE DAY TEAGUE WAS MURDERED,
CORPS MEMBERS KEPT THEIR CAMERAS
ROLLING, AS ALWAYS.
THEY WANTED TO CAPTURE
EVERYONE'S REACTION AS THEY
HEARD THE NEWS.
JEROME, LET ME TALK TO YOU,
MAN.
Reporter: NOBODY WANTED TO
BREAK IT TO JEROME SCOTT.
HE WAS DIAMOND TEAGUE'S BEST
FRIEND.
THIS IS THE HARDEST THING
I'VE EVER HAD TO DO, MAN.
DIAMOND GOT SHOT, MAN.
HE DIED, MAN.
HE DIED THIS MORNING AROUND
9:00.
9:00 A.M.
YOU PLAYING.
I'M NOT PLAYING, MAN.
THIS IS NO JOKE, MAN.
I WISH IT WAS A JOKE.
HIS MOTHER WANTS YOU TO GIVE HER
A CALL.
YOU'RE PLAYING.
I'M NOT PLAYING.
I'M NOT PLAYING MAN, ALL
RIGHT?
SOME BAMA, MAN JUST WALKED UP
AND SHOT HIM IN THE HEAD ON HIS
FRONT PORCH.
FOR NO REASON?
YEAH.
NO REASON.
Reporter: THIS ISN'T THE
FIRST TIME JEROME SCOTT HAS
GRIEVED FOR A BEST FRIEND.
WHEN HE WAS ONLY TEN YEARS OLD,
HIS BUDDY GOT SHOT TO DEATH
RIGHT IN FRONT OF HIM.
YOU KNOW GOD IS WITH DIAMOND.
SO YOU'LL BE SEE HIM AGAIN, MAN.
GIVE HER A CALL.
SHE NEEDS YOU.
OKAY.
I WROTE DOWN HER NUMBER.
I'M SORRY I HAD TO BE THE ONE TO
TELL YOU.
YOU KNOW, I'M SORRY, MAN.
Reporter: SINCE THIS PROJECT
BEGAN, AN AVERAGE OF ONE CORPS
MEMBER HAS BEEN MURDERED ALMOST
EVERY YEAR.
ACCORDING TO THE CORPS' RECORDS,
ONE OF THEIR MEMBERS WAS BEATEN
TO DEATH.
ONE WAS RAPED AND KILLED.
ANOTHER WAS RIDING HIS BIKE WHEN
HE GOT CAUGHT IN THE MIDDLE OF A
SHOOTOUT.
THREE WERE SHOT EXECUTION-STYLE.
BUT HE'S NOT IN HERE AT ALL.
Reporter: WHEN DIAMOND TEAGUE
GOT KILLED, CORPS MEMBERS
SEARCHED THROUGH THE NEWSPAPERS
FOR SOME SORT OF ARTICLE ABOUT
HIS MURDER.
THEY FOUND 43 WORDS IN THE
"WASHINGTON POST."
SO CORPS MEMBERS HAVE DECIDED
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO TELL THE
WORLD ABOUT DIAMOND TEAGUE.
I WANT THE PEOPLE OF THIS
CITY TO KNOW THAT BECAUSE A
BLACK MAN GETS KILLED IN
SOUTHEAST, HE'S NOT JUST A DRUG
DEALER OR GANGBANGER OR HE HAD
ENEMIES.
AND NOT JUST TO DISCOUNT HIM AS
A NOBODY WHEN HE DESERVES FOR
PEOPLE TO KNOW HIM AND TO KNOW
HIS LIFE.
Reporter: REMEMBER ALL THAT
VIDEO THE CORPS BEEN SHOOTING?
THEY'RE TURNING IT INTO A KIND
OF REALITY TV SHOW.
THIS IS THE ULTIMATE REALITY
SHOW.
THIS AIN'T THE REAL WORLD.
Reporter: CORPS MEMBERS WANT
THE WORLD TO KNOW ABOUT THEIR
LIVES HERE IN ANACOSTIA, IN
SOUTHEAST WASHINGTON.
THEY SAY HERE WE ARE WORKING TO
SAVE AN ENDANGERED RIVER, WE'RE
THE ONES WHO ARE IN DANGER.
THEY CALL THEIR SHOW:
"ENDANGERED SPECIES."
THEY PLAN TO RUN IT ON PUBLIC
ACCESS TV.
FAMILY AND FRIENDS POURED OUT
FOR DIAMOND TEAGUE'S FUNERAL.
MEMBERS OF THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS CAME, TOO, IN
UNIFORM.
THE CORPS SHOWED SOME OF THEIR
VIDEO FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
PUBLIC AS A KIND OF EULOGY.
FOR TEAGUE'S FAMILY, THE VIDEO
OFFERED A MOMENT TO CELEBRATE.
FOR DARIUS PHILLIPS, TEAGUE'S
DEATH WAS A KIND OF BEGINNING.
IT'S TIRESOME TO COME TO
WORK, AND YOU PICK UP THE PAPER.
"YOUNG MAN SLAIN, CAR ACCIDENT,
GOT SHOT, LOCKED UP."
YOU GET TIRED OF HEARING ALL OF
THIS NEGATIVE STUFF.
SO FROM THIS DAY FORTH, HE'S
ANOTHER PERSON I PUT ON MY LIST
TO REDEDICATE MY LIFE SO I CAN
DO SOMETHING POSITIVE TO GET
SOME KIND OF OUTCOME, TO CHANGE
THE WORLD.
Reporter: IT'S THREE DAYS
AFTER TEAGUE'S FUNERAL, AND
PHILLIPS AND THE REST OF THE
CORPS ARE BACK AT WORK ON THE
STREETS OF SOUTHEAST WASHINGTON.
THEY'VE PRESSURED THE CITY TO
GIVE THEM THIS DUSTY PATCH OF
LAND, SQUEEZED BETWEEN TWO
FACTORIES.
THEY'RE TURNING IT INTO A PUBLIC
PARK.
OKAY, BACK IN THIS AREA, OVER
ON THIS SIDE IS THE PARK AREA,
AND I GUESS WE WILL HAVE BENCHES
AND LITTLE TABLES AND
EVERYTHING.
Reporter: WHEN CORPS MEMBERS
TALK ABOUT THEIR WORK AND HOW
IT'LL AFFECT THEIR FUTURE, THEY
SOUND AS IF THERE'S NO LIMIT TO
WHAT THEY CAN DO.
I KNOW A LOT ABOUT THIS
RIVER.
I KNOW A LOT ABOUT POLLUTION AND
I KNOW A LOT ABOUT DUMPING RULES
AND LAWS.
SO, THAT CAN LEAD ME TO THE
E.P.A.
I KNOW HOW TO PLANT TREES AND DO
LANDSCAPING.
THAT'LL LEAD ME TO NATIONAL PARK
SERVICES.
IT REALLY IS A STEPPING STONE.
Reporter: MAYBE SHE'LL PULL
IT OFF.
MAYBE THE CORPS MEMBERS' DREAMS
WILL COME TRUE.
THE PROGRAM ITSELF IS CONSTANTLY
STRUGGLING.
THE EARTH CONSERVATION CORPS HAS
LOST MORE THAN HALF ITS FUNDING
IN THE PAST FEW YEARS.
FOUNDATIONS AREN'T GIVING WHAT
THEY USED TO.
DO YOU REALLY SERIOUSLY PICTURE
THAT ANYBODY'S GOING TO COME OUT
HERE WITH A PICNIC IN A YEAR AND
HANG OUT IN THE MIDDLE OF THIS
UGLY INDUSTRIAL AREA?
WE SEE THE BIGGER PICTURE.
WE'RE JUST THE BEGINNING OF
SOMETHING THAT'S GOING TO BE
BEAUTIFUL.
ALL GREAT THINGS HAVE TO START
IN THE ROUGHNESS, AND I'D SAY IN
ABOUT A YEAR OR TWO, I'LL BRING
MY FAMILY OUT HERE AND STAND OUT
HERE BECAUSE I'M GOING TO BE
PROUD OF SOMETHING THAT I HAD A
HAND IN DOING.
I HELPED CONSTRUCT THIS AREA.
THAT'S... THAT'S ALWAYS GOING TO
BE A PART OF MY LIFE.
Reporter: THE CORPS IS
PLANNING TO DEDICATE THIS
PROJECT EARLY NEXT YEAR.
THE MAYOR OF WASHINGTON, D.C.
SAYS HE'LL COME.
THEY'RE GOING TO CALL IT DIAMOND
TEAGUE MEMORIAL PARK.
Moyers: IN THE THREE AND A
HALF YEARS SINCE OUR REPORT,
VIOLENCE HAS CLAIMED THE LIVES
OF MORE MEMBERS OF THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS.
ONE OF THEM WAS 19-YEAR-OLD
AARON TEETER, A BUDDING
FILMMAKER WHEN HE WAS GUNNED
DOWN LAST APRIL.
HE WAS A HIGH SCHOOL DROPOUT
WITH TIME IN JUVENILE DETENTION
FOR DEALING DRUGS.
WHEN HE JOINED THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS, HIS LIFE
BEGAN TO TURN AROUND.
HE GOT INTERESTED IN JOURNALISM
AND BEGAN PRODUCING STORIES
ABOUT SCHOOL CONDITIONS,
DETENTION CENTERS AND EFFORTS TO
KEEP TEENS OUT OF JAIL.
HE WAS WORKING ON A DOCUMENTARY
ABOUT GUNS WHEN HE WAS SHOT
DEAD.
TWO SUSPECTS IN THE MURDER ARE
NOW AWAITING TRIAL.
JEROME SCOTT, THE BRIGHT KID WHO
WANTED TO WORK WITH ANIMALS, WON
A FULL SCHOLARSHIP TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS AT LITTLE
ROCK-- AN HONOR HE DIDN'T LIVE
TO ENJOY.
HE DIED OF LEUKEMIA, UNDIAGNOSED
UNTIL THE DAY IT KILLED HIM.
THE UNIVERSITY ESTABLISHED A
SCHOLARSHIP IN JEROME'S NAME.
ITS FIRST RECIPIENT IS ANOTHER
MEMBER OF THE EARTH CONSERVATION
CORPS, DEREK OSHIN.
HE'S STUDYING ELECTRO-
ENGINEERING AND HAS A 3.2 GRADE
POINT AVERAGE.
TO DATE, NEARLY 400 YOUNG PEOPLE
HAVE GRADUATED FROM THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS AND HELPED
OVER 30,000 PEOPLE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD LEARN ABOUT THE
HERE AND NOW OF THE ENVIRONMENT.
THERE'S MORE ABOUT THE EARTH
CONSERVATION CORPS ON pbs.org.
I'M BILL MOYERS.